PRESIDENT:  Thank you very much.  Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, members of Congress, the First Lady of the United States — (applause) — and citizens of America:

Tonight, as we mark the conclusion of our celebration of Black History Month, we are reminded of our nation’s path towards civil rights and the work that still remains to be done.  (Applause.)  Recent threats targeting Jewish community centers and vandalism of Jewish cemeteries, as well as last week’s shooting in Kansas City, remind us that while we may be a nation divided on policies, we are a country that stands united in condemning hate and evil in all of its very ugly forms.  (Applause.)

Each American generation passes the torch of truth, liberty and justice in an unbroken chain all the way down to the present.  That torch is now in our hands.  And we will use it to light up the world.  I am here tonight to deliver a message of unity and strength, and it is a message deeply delivered from my heart.  A new chapter — (applause) — of American Greatness is now beginning.  A new national pride is sweeping across our nation.  And a new surge of optimism is placing impossible dreams firmly within our grasp.

What we are witnessing today is the renewal of the American spirit.  Our allies will find that America is once again ready to lead.  (Applause.)  All the nations of the world — friend or foe — will find that America is strong, America is proud, and America is free.

In nine years, the United States will celebrate the 250th anniversary of our founding — 250 years since the day we declared our independence.  It will be one of the great milestones in the history of the world.  But what will America look like as we reach our 250th year?  What kind of country will we leave for our children?

I will not allow the mistakes of recent decades past to define the course of our future.  For too long, we’ve watched our middle class shrink as we’ve exported our jobs and wealth to foreign countries.  We’ve financed and built one global project after another, but ignored the fates of our children in the inner cities of Chicago, Baltimore, Detroit, and so many other places throughout our land.

We’ve defended the borders of other nations while leaving our own borders wide open for anyone to cross and for drugs to pour in at a now unprecedented rate.

And we’ve spent trillions and trillions of dollars overseas, while our infrastructure at home has so badly crumbled.

Then, in 2016, the Earth shifted beneath our feet.  The rebellion started as a quiet protest, spoken by families of all colors and creeds — families who just wanted a fair shot for their children and a fair hearing for their concerns.

But then the quiet voices became a loud chorus as thousands of citizens now spoke out together, from cities small and large, all across our country.  Finally, the chorus became an earthquake, and the people turned out by the tens of millions, and they were all united by one very simple, but crucial demand: that America must put its own citizens first.  Because only then can we truly make America great again.  (Applause.)

Dying industries will come roaring back to life.  Heroic veterans will get the care they so desperately need.  Our military will be given the resources its brave warriors so richly deserve.  Crumbling infrastructure will be replaced with new roads, bridges, tunnels, airports and railways gleaming across our very, very beautiful land.  Our terrible drug epidemic will slow down and, ultimately, stop.  And our neglected inner cities will see a rebirth of hope, safety and opportunity.  Above all else, we will keep our promises to the American people.  (Applause.)

It’s been a little over a month since my inauguration, and I want to take this moment to update the nation on the progress I’ve made in keeping those promises.

Since my election, Ford, Fiat-Chrysler, General Motors, Sprint, Softbank, Lockheed, Intel, Walmart, and many others, have announced that they will invest billions of dollars in the United States and will create tens of thousands of new American jobs. (Applause.)

The stock market has gained almost $3 trillion in value since the election on November 8th, a record.  We’ve saved taxpayers hundreds of millions of dollars by bringing down the price of a fantastic — and it is a fantastic — new F-35 jet fighter, and we’ll be saving billions more on contracts all across our government.  We have placed a hiring freeze on non-military and non-essential federal workers.

We have begun to drain the swamp of government corruption by imposing a five-year ban on lobbying by executive branch officials and a lifetime ban — (applause) — thank you — and a lifetime ban on becoming lobbyists for a foreign government.

We have undertaken a historic effort to massively reduce job-crushing regulations, creating a deregulation task force inside of every government agency.  (Applause.)  And we’re imposing a new rule which mandates that for every one new regulation, two old regulations must be eliminated.  (Applause.)  We’re going to stop the regulations that threaten the future and livelihood of our great coal miners.  (Applause.)

We have cleared the way for the construction of the Keystone and Dakota Access Pipelines — (applause) — thereby creating tens of thousands of jobs.  And I’ve issued a new directive that new American pipelines be made with American steel.  (Applause.)

We have withdrawn the United States from the job-killing Trans-Pacific Partnership.  (Applause.)  And with the help of Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, we have formed a council with our neighbors in Canada to help ensure that women entrepreneurs have access to the networks, markets and capital they need to start a business and live out their financial dreams.  (Applause.)

To protect our citizens, I have directed the Department of Justice to form a Task Force on Reducing Violent Crime.  I have further ordered the Departments of Homeland Security and Justice, along with the Department of State and the Director of National Intelligence, to coordinate an aggressive strategy to dismantle the criminal cartels that have spread all across our nation.  (Applause.)  We will stop the drugs from pouring into our country and poisoning our youth, and we will expand treatment for those who have become so badly addicted.  (Applause.)

At the same time, my administration has answered the pleas of the American people for immigration enforcement and border security.  (Applause.)  By finally enforcing our immigration laws, we will raise wages, help the unemployed, save billions and billions of dollars, and make our communities safer for everyone.  (Applause.)  We want all Americans to succeed, but that can’t happen in an environment of lawless chaos.  We must restore integrity and the rule of law at our borders.  (Applause.)

For that reason, we will soon begin the construction of a great, great wall along our southern border.  (Applause.)  As we speak tonight, we are removing gang members, drug dealers, and criminals that threaten our communities and prey on our very innocent citizens.  Bad ones are going out as I speak, and as I promised throughout the campaign.

To any in Congress who do not believe we should enforce our laws, I would ask you this one question:  What would you say to the American family that loses their jobs, their income, or their loved one because America refused to uphold its laws and defend its borders?  (Applause.)

Our obligation is to serve, protect, and defend the citizens of the United States.  We are also taking strong measures to protect our nation from radical Islamic terrorism.  (Applause.)  According to data provided by the Department of Justice, the vast majority of individuals convicted of terrorism and terrorism-related offenses since 9/11 came here from outside of our country.  We have seen the attacks at home — from Boston to San Bernardino to the Pentagon, and, yes, even the World Trade Center.

We have seen the attacks in France, in Belgium, in Germany, and all over the world.

It is not compassionate, but reckless, to allow uncontrolled entry from places where proper vetting cannot occur. Those given the high honor of admission to the United States should support this country and love its people and its values.

It is not compassionate, but reckless to allow uncontrolled entry from places where proper vetting cannot occur.  (Applause.)  Those given the high honor of admission to the United States should support this country and love its people and its values.  We cannot allow a beachhead of terrorism to form inside America.  We cannot allow our nation to become a sanctuary for extremists.  (Applause.)

That is why my administration has been working on improved vetting procedures, and we will shortly take new steps to keep our nation safe and to keep out those out who will do us harm.  (Applause.)

As promised, I directed the Department of Defense to develop a plan to demolish and destroy ISIS — a network of lawless savages that have slaughtered Muslims and Christians, and men, and women, and children of all faiths and all beliefs.  We will work with our allies, including our friends and allies in the Muslim world, to extinguish this vile enemy from our planet.  (Applause.)

I have also imposed new sanctions on entities and individuals who support Iran’s ballistic missile program, and reaffirmed our unbreakable alliance with the State of Israel.  (Applause.)

Finally, I have kept my promise to appoint a justice to the United States Supreme Court, from my list of 20 judges, who will defend our Constitution.  (Applause.)

I am greatly honored to have Maureen Scalia with us in the gallery tonight.  (Applause.)  Thank you, Maureen.  Her late, great husband, Antonin Scalia, will forever be a symbol of American justice.  To fill his seat, we have chosen Judge Neil Gorsuch, a man of incredible skill and deep devotion to the law.  He was confirmed unanimously by the Court of Appeals, and I am asking the Senate to swiftly approve his nomination.  (Applause.)

Tonight, as I outline the next steps we must take as a country, we must honestly acknowledge the circumstances we inherited.

Ninety-four million Americans are out of the labor force. Over 43 million people are now living in poverty, and over 43 million Americans are on food stamps.

More than 1 in 5 people in their prime working years are not working.

We have the worst financial recovery in 65 years.  In the last eight years, the past administration has put on more new debt than nearly all of the other Presidents combined.

We’ve lost more than one-fourth of our manufacturing jobs since NAFTA was approved, and we’ve lost 60,000 factories since China joined the World Trade Organization in 2001.  Our trade deficit in goods with the world last year was nearly $800 billion dollars.  And overseas we have inherited a series of tragic foreign policy disasters.

Solving these and so many other pressing problems will require us to work past the differences of party.  It will require us to tap into the American spirit that has overcome every challenge throughout our long and storied history.  But to accomplish our goals at home and abroad, we must restart the engine of the American economy — making it easier for companies to do business in the United States, and much, much harder for companies to leave our country.  (Applause.)

Right now, American companies are taxed at one of the highest rates anywhere in the world.  My economic team is developing historic tax reform that will reduce the tax rate on our companies so they can compete and thrive anywhere and with anyone.  (Applause.)  It will be a big, big cut.

At the same time, we will provide massive tax relief for the middle class.  We must create a level playing field for American companies and our workers.  We have to do it.  (Applause.)  Currently, when we ship products out of America, many other countries make us pay very high tariffs and taxes.  But when foreign companies ship their products into America, we charge them nothing, or almost nothing.

I just met with officials and workers from a great American company, Harley-Davidson.  In fact, they proudly displayed five of their magnificent motorcycles, made in the USA, on the front lawn of the White House.  ((Laughter and applause.)  And they wanted me to ride one and I said, “No, thank you.”  (Laughter.)

At our meeting, I asked them, how are you doing, how is business?  They said that it’s good.  I asked them further, how are you doing with other countries, mainly international sales?  They told me — without even complaining, because they have been so mistreated for so long that they’ve become used to it — that it’s very hard to do business with other countries because they tax our goods at such a high rate.  They said that in the case of another country, they taxed their motorcycles at 100 percent.  They weren’t even asking for a change.  But I am.  (Applause.)

I believe strongly in free trade but it also has to be fair trade.  It’s been a long time since we had fair trade.  The first Republican President, Abraham Lincoln, warned that the “abandonment of the protective policy by the American government… will produce want and ruin among our people.”  Lincoln was right — and it’s time we heeded his advice and his words.  (Applause.)  I am not going to let America and its great companies and workers be taken advantage of us any longer.  They have taken advantage of our country.  No longer.  (Applause.)

I am going to bring back millions of jobs.  Protecting our workers also means reforming our system of legal immigration.  (Applause.)  The current, outdated system depresses wages for our poorest workers, and puts great pressure on taxpayers.  Nations around the world, like Canada, Australia and many others, have a merit-based immigration system.  (Applause.)  It’s a basic principle that those seeking to enter a country ought to be able to support themselves financially.  Yet, in America, we do not enforce this rule, straining the very public resources that our poorest citizens rely upon.

According to the National Academy of Sciences, our current immigration system costs America’s taxpayers many billions of dollars a year.

Switching away from this current system of lower-skilled immigration, and instead adopting a merit-based system, we will have so many more benefits.  It will save countless dollars, raise workers’ wages, and help struggling families — including immigrant families — enter the middle class.  And they will do it quickly, and they will be very, very happy, indeed.  (Applause.)

I believe that real and positive immigration reform is possible, as long as we focus on the following goals:  To improve jobs and wages for Americans; to strengthen our nation’s security; and to restore respect for our laws.  If we are guided by the wellbeing of American citizens, then I believe Republicans and Democrats can work together to achieve an outcome that has eluded our country for decades.  (Applause.)

Another Republican President, Dwight D. Eisenhower, initiated the last truly great national infrastructure program — the building of the Interstate Highway System.  The time has come for a new program of national rebuilding.  (Applause.) America has spent approximately six trillion dollars in theMiddle East, all this while our infrastructure at home is crumbling. With this six trillion dollars we could have rebuilt our country – twice. And maybe even three times if we had people who had the ability to negotiate.

To launch our national rebuilding, I will be asking Congress to approve legislation that produces a $1 trillion investment in infrastructure of the United States — financed through both public and private capital — creating millions of new jobs.  (Applause.)  This effort will be guided by two core principles:  buy American and hire American.  (Applause.)

Tonight, I am also calling on this Congress to repeal and replace Obamacare — (applause) — with reforms that expand choice, increase access, lower costs, and, at the same time, provide better healthcare.  (Applause.)

Mandating every American to buy government-approved health insurance was never the right solution for our country.  (Applause.)  The way to make health insurance available to everyone is to lower the cost of health insurance, and that is what we are going do.  (Applause.)

Obamacare premiums nationwide have increased by double and triple digits. As an example, Arizona went up 116 percent last year alone. Governor Matt Bevin of Kentucky just said Obamacare is failing in his State — it is unsustainable and collapsing.

One-third of counties have only one insurer, and they are losing them fast.  They are losing them so fast.  They are leaving, and many Americans have no choice at all.  There’s no choice left.  Remember when you were told that you could keep your doctor and keep your plan?  We now know that all of those promises have been totally broken.   Obamacare is collapsing, and we must act decisively to protect all Americans.  (Applause.)

Action is not a choice, it is a necessity.  So I am calling on all Democrats and Republicans in Congress to work with us to save Americans from this imploding Obamacare disaster.  (Applause.)

Here are the principles that should guide the Congress as we move to create a better healthcare system for all Americans:

First, we should ensure that Americans with preexisting conditions have access to coverage, and that we have a stable transition for Americans currently enrolled in the healthcare exchanges.  (Applause.)

Secondly, we should help Americans purchase their own coverage through the use of tax credits and expanded Health Savings Accounts — but it must be the plan they want, not the plan forced on them by our government.  (Applause.)

Thirdly, we should give our great state governors the resources and flexibility they need with Medicaid to make sure no one is left out.  (Applause.)

Fourth, we should implement legal reforms that protect patients and doctors from unnecessary costs that drive up the price of insurance, and work to bring down the artificially high price of drugs, and bring them down immediately.  (Applause.)

And finally, the time has come to give Americans the freedom to purchase health insurance across state lines — (applause) — which will create a truly competitive national marketplace that will bring costs way down and provide far better care.  So important.

Everything that is broken in our country can be fixed.  Every problem can be solved.  And every hurting family can find healing and hope.

Our citizens deserve this, and so much more — so why not join forces and finally get the job done, and get it done right?  (Applause.)  On this and so many other things, Democrats and Republicans should get together and unite for the good of our country and for the good of the American people.  (Applause.)

My administration wants to work with members in both parties to make childcare accessible and affordable, to help ensure new parents that they have paid family leave, to invest in women’s health, and to promote clean air and clear water, and to rebuild our military and our infrastructure.

True love for our people requires us to find common ground, to advance the common good, and to cooperate on behalf of every American child who deserves a much brighter future.

An incredible young woman is with us this evening, who should serve as an inspiration to us all.  Today is Rare Disease Day, and joining us in the gallery is a rare disease survivor, Megan Crowley.  (Applause.)

Megan was diagnosed with Pompe disease, a rare and serious illness, when she was 15 months old.  She was not expected to live past five.  On receiving this news, Megan’s dad, John, fought with everything he had to save the life of his precious child.  He founded a company to look for a cure, and helped develop the drug that saved Megan’s life.  Today she is 20 years old and a sophomore at Notre Dame.  (Applause.)

Megan’s story is about the unbounded power of a father’s love for a daughter.  But our slow and burdensome approval process at the Food and Drug Administration keeps too many advances, like the one that saved Megan’s life, from reaching those in need.  If we slash the restraints, not just at the FDA but across our government, then we will be blessed with far more miracles just like Megan.  (Applause.)  In fact, our children will grow up in a nation of miracles.

But to achieve this future, we must enrich the mind and the souls of every American child.  Education is the civil rights issue of our time.  (Applause.)  I am calling upon members of both parties to pass an education bill that funds school choice for disadvantaged youth, including millions of African American and Latino children.  (Applause.)  These families should be free to choose the public, private, charter, magnet, religious, or home school that is right for them.  (Applause.)

Joining us tonight in the gallery is a remarkable woman, Denisha Merriweather.  As a young girl, Denisha struggled in school and failed third grade twice.  But then she was able to enroll in a private center for learning — a great learning center — with the help of a tax credit and a scholarship program.

Today, she is the first in her family to graduate, not just from high school, but from college.  Later this year she will get her master’s degree in social work.  We want all children to be able to break the cycle of poverty just like Denisha.  (Applause.)

But to break the cycle of poverty, we must also break the cycle of violence.

The murder rate in 2015 experienced its largest single-year increase in nearly half a century.

In Chicago, more than 4,000 people were shot last year alone, and the murder rate so far this year has been even higher.  This is not acceptable in our society.  (Applause.)

Every American child should be able to grow up in a safe community, to attend a great school, and to have access to a high-paying job.  (Applause.)  But to create this future, we must work with, not against — not against — the men and women of law enforcement.  (Applause.)  We must build bridges of cooperation and trust — not drive the wedge of disunity and, really, it’s what it is, division.  It’s pure, unadulterated division.  We have to unify.

Police and sheriffs are members of our community.  They’re friends and neighbors, they’re mothers and fathers, sons and daughters — and they leave behind loved ones every day who worry about whether or not they’ll come home safe and sound.  We must support the incredible men and women of law enforcement.  (Applause.)

And we must support the victims of crime.  I have ordered the Department of Homeland Security to create an office to serve American victims.  The office is called VOICE — Victims of Immigration Crime Engagement.  We are providing a voice to those who have been ignored by our media and silenced by special interests.  (Applause.)  Joining us in the audience tonight are four very brave Americans whose government failed them.  Their names are Jamiel Shaw, Susan Oliver, Jenna Oliver, and Jessica Davis.

Jamiel’s 17-year-old son was viciously murdered by an illegal immigrant gang member who had just been released from prison.  Jamiel Shaw, Jr. was an incredible young man, with unlimited potential who was getting ready to go to college where he would have excelled as a great college quarterback.  But he never got the chance.  His father, who is in the audience tonight, has become a very good friend of mine.  Jamiel, thank you.  Thank you.  (Applause.)

Also with us are Susan Oliver and Jessica Davis.  Their husbands, Deputy Sheriff Danny Oliver and Detective Michael Davis, were slain in the line of duty in California.  They were pillars of their community.  These brave men were viciously gunned down by an illegal immigrant with a criminal record and two prior deportations.  Should have never been in our country.

Sitting with Susan is her daughter, Jenna.  Jenna, I want you to know that your father was a hero, and that tonight you have the love of an entire country supporting you and praying for you.  (Applause.)

To Jamiel, Jenna, Susan and Jessica, I want you to know that we will never stop fighting for justice.  Your loved ones will never, ever be forgotten.  We will always honor their memory.  (Applause.)

Finally, to keep America safe, we must provide the men and women of the United States military with the tools they need to prevent war — if they must — they have to fight and they only have to win.  (Applause.)

I am sending Congress a budget that rebuilds the military, eliminates the defense sequester — (applause) — and calls for one of the largest increases in national defense spending in American history.  My budget will also increase funding for our veterans.  Our veterans have delivered for this nation, and now we must deliver for them.  (Applause.)

The challenges we face as a nation are great, but our people are even greater.  And none are greater or braver than those who fight for America in uniform.  (Applause.)

We are blessed to be joined tonight by Carryn Owens, the widow of a U.S. Navy Special Operator, Senior Chief William “Ryan” Owens.  Ryan died as he lived:  a warrior and a hero, battling against terrorism and securing our nation.  (Applause.)  I just spoke to our great General Mattis, just now, who reconfirmed that — and I quote — “Ryan was a part of a highly successful raid that generated large amounts of vital intelligence that will lead to many more victories in the future against our enemies.”  Ryan’s legacy is etched into eternity.  Thank you.  (Applause.)  And Ryan is looking down, right now — you know that — and he is very happy because I think he just broke a record.  (Laughter and applause.)

For as the Bible teaches us, “There is no greater act of love than to lay down one’s life for one’s friends.”  Ryan laid down his life for his friends, for his country, and for our freedom.  And we will never forget Ryan.  (Applause.)

To those allies who wonder what kind of a friend America will be, look no further than the heroes who wear our uniform.  Our foreign policy calls for a direct, robust and meaningful engagement with the world.  It is American leadership based on vital security interests that we share with our allies all across the globe.

We strongly support NATO, an alliance forged through the bonds of two world wars that dethroned fascism, and a Cold War, and defeated communism.  (Applause.)

But our partners must meet their financial obligations.  And now, based on our very strong and frank discussions, they are beginning to do just that.  In fact, I can tell you, the money is pouring in.  Very nice.  (Applause.)  We expect our partners — whether in NATO, the Middle East, or in the Pacific — to take a direct and meaningful role in both strategic and military operations, and pay their fair share of the cost.  Have to do that.

We will respect historic institutions, but we will respect the foreign rights of all nations, and they have to respect our rights as a nation also.  (Applause.)  Free nations are the best vehicle for expressing the will of the people, and America respects the right of all nations to chart their own path.  My job is not to represent the world.  My job is to represent the United States of America. (Applause.)

But we know that America is better off when there is less conflict, not more.  We must learn from the mistakes of the past.  We have seen the war and the destruction that have ravaged and raged throughout the world — all across the world.  The only long-term solution for these humanitarian disasters, in many cases, is to create the conditions where displaced persons can safely return home and begin the long, long process of rebuilding.  (Applause.)

America is willing to find new friends, and to forge new partnerships, where shared interests align.  We want harmony and stability, not war and conflict.  We want peace, wherever peace can be found.

America is friends today with former enemies.  Some of our closest allies, decades ago, fought on the opposite side of these terrible, terrible wars.  This history should give us all faith in the possibilities for a better world.  Hopefully, the 250th year for America will see a world that is more peaceful, more just, and more free.

On our 100th anniversary, in 1876, citizens from across our nation came to Philadelphia to celebrate America’s centennial.  At that celebration, the country’s builders and artists and inventors showed off their wonderful creations.  Alexander Graham Bell displayed his telephone for the first time.  Remington unveiled the first typewriter.  An early attempt was made at electric light.  Thomas Edison showed an automatic telegraph and an electric pen.  Imagine the wonders our country could know in America’s 250th year.  (Applause.)

Think of the marvels we can achieve if we simply set free the dreams of our people.  Cures to the illnesses that have always plagued us are not too much to hope.  American footprints on distant worlds are not too big a dream.

Millions lifted from welfare to work is not too much to expect.

And streets where mothers are safe from fear, schools where children learn in peace, and jobs where Americans prosper and grow are not too much to ask.  (Applause.)

When we have all of this, we will have made America greater than ever before — for all Americans.  This is our vision.  This is our mission.  But we can only get there together.  We are one people, with one destiny.  We all bleed the same blood.  We all salute the same great American flag.  And we all are made by the same God.  (Applause.)

When we fulfill this vision, when we celebrate our 250 years of glorious freedom, we will look back on tonight as when this new chapter of American Greatness began.  The time for small thinking is over.  The time for trivial fights is behind us.  We just need the courage to share the dreams that fill our hearts, the bravery to express the hopes that stir our souls, and the confidence to turn those hopes and those dreams into action.

From now on, America will be empowered by our aspirations, not burdened by our fears; inspired by the future, not bound by the failures of the past; and guided by our vision, not blinded by our doubts.

I am asking all citizens to embrace this renewal of the American spirit.  I am asking all members of Congress to join me in dreaming big, and bold, and daring things for our country.  I am asking everyone watching tonight to seize this moment.  Believe in yourselves, believe in your future, and believe, once more, in America.

Thank you, God bless you, and God bless the United States.  (Applause.)

END
hief Justice Roberts, President Carter, President Clinton, President Bush, President Obama, fellow Americans, and people of the world: thank you.

We, the citizens of America, are now joined in a great national effort to rebuild our country and to restore its promise for all of our people.

Together, we will determine the course of America and the world for many, many years to come.

We will face challenges. We will confront hardships. But we will get the job done.

Every four years, we gather on these steps to carry out the orderly and peaceful transfer of power, and we are grateful to President Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama for their gracious aid throughout this transition. They have been magnificent. Thank you.

Today’s ceremony, however, has very special meaning. Because today we are not merely transferring power from one administration to another, or from one party to another – but we are transferring power from Washington, D.C. and giving it back to you, the people.

For too long, a small group in our nation’s Capital has reaped the rewards of government while the people have borne the cost.

Washington flourished – but the people did not share in its wealth.

Politicians prospered – but the jobs left, and the factories closed.

The establishment protected itself, but not the citizens of our country.

Their victories have not been your victories; their triumphs have not been your triumphs; and while they celebrated in our nation’s Capital, there was little to celebrate for struggling families all across our land.

That all changes – starting right here, and right now, because this moment is your moment: it belongs to you.

It belongs to everyone gathered here today and everyone watching all across America.

This is your day. This is your celebration.

And this, the United States of America, is your country.

What truly matters is not which party controls our government, but whether our government is controlled by the people.

January 20, 2017, will be remembered as the day the people became the rulers of this nation again.

The forgotten men and women of our country will be forgotten no longer.

Everyone is listening to you now.

You came by the tens of millions to become part of a historic movement the likes of which the world has never seen before.

At the center of this movement is a crucial conviction: that a nation exists to serve its citizens.

Americans want great schools for their children, safe neighborhoods for their families, and good jobs for themselves.

These are the just and reasonable demands of righteous people and a righteous public.

But for too many of our citizens, a different reality exists: Mothers and children trapped in poverty in our inner cities; rusted-out factories scattered like tombstones across the landscape of our nation; an education system, flush with cash, but which leaves our young and beautiful students deprived of all knowledge; and the crime and the gangs and the drugs that have stolen too many lives and robbed our country of so much unrealized potential.

This American carnage stops right here and stops right now.

We are one nation – and their pain is our pain. Their dreams are our dreams; and their success will be our success. We share one heart, one home, and one glorious destiny.

The oath of office I take today is an oath of allegiance to all Americans.

For many decades, we’ve enriched foreign industry at the expense of American industry. Subsidized the armies of other countries while allowing for the very sad depletion of our military. We’ve defended other nation’s borders while refusing to defend our own. And spent trillions and trillions of dollars overseas while America’s infrastructure has fallen into disrepair and decay.

We’ve made other countries rich while the wealth, strength, and confidence of our country has dissipated over the horizon.

One by one, the factories shuttered and left our shores, with not even a thought about the millions and millions of American workers left behind.

The wealth of our middle class has been ripped from their homes and then redistributed all across the world.

But that is the past. And now we are looking only to the future.

We assembled here today are issuing a new decree to be heard in every city, in every foreign capital, and in every hall of power.

From this day forward, a new vision will govern our land.

From this moment on, it’s going to be only America First. America First.

Every decision on trade, on taxes, on immigration, on foreign affairs, will be made to benefit American workers and American families.

We must protect our borders from the ravages of other countries making our products, stealing our companies, and destroying our jobs. Protection will lead to great prosperity and strength.

I will fight for you with every breath in my body – and I will never, ever let you down.

America will start winning again, winning like never before.

We will bring back our jobs. We will bring back our borders. We will bring back our wealth. And we will bring back our dreams.

We will build new roads, and highways, and bridges, and airports, and tunnels, and railways all across our wonderful nation.

We will get our people off of welfare and back to work – rebuilding our country with American hands and American labor.

We will follow two simple rules: Buy American and hire American.

We will seek friendship and goodwill with the nations of the world – but we do so with the understanding that it is the right of all nations to put their own interests first.

We do not seek to impose our way of life on anyone, but rather to let it shine as an example — we will shine — for everyone to follow.

We will reinforce old alliances and form new ones – and unite the civilized world against radical Islamic terrorism, which we will eradicate completely from the face of the Earth.

At the bedrock of our politics will be a total allegiance to the United States of America, and through our loyalty to our country, we will rediscover our loyalty to each other.

When you open your heart to patriotism, there is no room for prejudice.

The Bible tells us, “how good and pleasant it is when God’s people live together in unity.”

We must speak our minds openly, debate our disagreements honestly, but always pursue solidarity.

When America is united, America is totally unstoppable.

There should be no fear – we are protected, and we will always be protected. We will be protected by the great men and women of our military and law enforcement and, most importantly, we will be protected by God.

Finally, we must think big and dream even bigger.

In America, we understand that a nation is only living as long as it is striving.

We will no longer accept politicians who are all talk and no action – constantly complaining but never doing anything about it.

The time for empty talk is over. Now arrives the hour of action.

Do not allow anyone to tell you it cannot be done. No challenge can match the heart and fight and spirit of America.

We will not fail. Our country will thrive and prosper again.

We stand at the birth of a new millennium, ready to unlock the mysteries of space, to free the Earth from the miseries of disease, and to harness the energies, industries and technologies of tomorrow.

A new national pride will stir our souls, lift our sights, and heal our divisions.

It’s time to remember that old wisdom our soldiers will never forget: that whether we are black or brown or white, we all bleed the same red blood of patriots. We all enjoy the same glorious freedoms, and we all salute the same great American flag.

And whether a child is born in the urban sprawl of Detroit or the windswept plains of Nebraska, they look up at the same night sky, they fill their heart with the same dreams, and they are infused with the breath of life by the same almighty Creator.

So to all Americans, in every city near and far, small and large, from mountain to mountain, and from ocean to ocean, hear these words: You will never be ignored again.

Your voice, your hopes, and your dreams, will define our American destiny. And your courage and goodness and love will forever guide us along the way.

Together, We will make America strong again.

We will make America wealthy again.

We will make America proud again.

We will make America safe again.

And, yes, together, we will make America great again.

Thank you, God bless you, and God bless America.

Thank you. God bless America.
ll of you deplorables. Thank you, ma’am. Boy, oh boy. We’re going to have a good time tonight. We’re going to have a good time.

Wow. I love that. I love that. Look at this. Look what that says. Hold up that sign for the cameras. Wow. That’s so beautiful. Thank you. Great. Thank you. That is so nice. And we are doing well in every way. The polls have been incredible. But we’re doing great.

It’s great to be in my second home — Florida. And in the city of Miami, where I have so many wonderful friends and projects and employees. We have an amazing group. And all of you know Trump National Doral and we’ll go there. Let’s go and have some fun.

We have tremendous developments in Miami on the water and Doral in particular has been a tremendous, tremendous thing. So I really appreciate it. I love this city. I love the whole state. So, and I have a lot of employees. And I’m paying them a lot of money. And, by the way, a lot of African-American employees, a lot of Hispanic employees. A lot. And they’re very happy. They like Donald Trump.

So new polls have just come in. And we’re leading in many of the battleground states all over the country. Including being 4 points up in a certain state known as Florida. And the Los Angeles Times has us 6 points up nationwide. Good poll. If it weren’t, I wouldn’t be telling you about it, I promise.

But come Nov. 8, we’re going to win Florida, and we’re going to win the White House, and we’re going to make America great again. It’s going to be a victory for the people. It’s going to be a victory for the workers, the families, the veterans. The veterans — we love our veterans. And every citizen of this country. It’s going to be a victory for those who haven’t had reason to hope for a very long time. I’m campaigning in every community, every part of this country for every last vote.

I’m running to be a president for all Americans. I just had the most amazing afternoon in Little Haiti. Good place. Unbelievable people. And I’m going to be campaigning hard for their votes. And they are incredible people. Our support comes from all regions, all backgrounds and all walks of life — all. All of them. And, by the way, at Little Haiti they presented me with something that I figured I’d put on. Is that OK to put it on? They gave me that and I love it. I think it’s great.

Your cops and soldiers — thank you. I love you too. Carpenters and welders, accountants and lawyers, young and old, rich and poor, Black, white and Hispanic. But above all, we are together and we are Americans. We got to pull our country together.

Just today I was honored to get the endorsement of recipients of the Medal of Honor, brave people. And many, many of our most amazing military leaders, generals, admirals, amazing people, real fighters. They really know what they’re doing. We now have the endorsements of more than 160 top generals and admirals. I didn’t know we had that many. Well, we love them.

We also have the support of 16,500 border patrol officers. The first time in the history of the border patrol that they’ve endorsed any presidential candidate. As well as law enforcement officers, police, all across the country.

In fact, I’m very excited to announce tonight that we just received a few minutes ago the endorsement of the largest police union in the country, the Fraternal Order of Police. Number one by far. Pretty good. Pretty good.

And we have the support of millions of patriotic moms and dads who go to work every day and make our country run.

While my opponent slanders you as deplorable — and irredeemable! Boy that second word is tough. You don’t hear that as much. But that means you’re never going to come back, folks. And I know you’re going to come back. We’re going to come back so strong. We’re going to be so strong. Stronger than ever before. Irredeemable. They don’t talk about that one, but that was, to me, pretty bad. I call you hardworking American patriots who love your family and really, really, really love your country. Love your country.

Clinton’s entire campaign rests on using a single tactic, and it’s not working very well. She spent hundreds of millions of dollars on phony campaign ads. And we’re actually I think probably leading — based on everything we’re seeing — and we’ve spent practically nothing. I’m proud of that. And you know what? We’re doing very well. You know in the old days if you spent less and you had far fewer people and you were leading you got credit. Today they say well, she’s spending much more money. Yes, but she’s doing poorly, very poorly. But what they do is they smear opponents — and you look at her history — and they question policies. And they talk all the time about racist, racist. It’s the only word they know. They used it on Romney. They used it on everybody. They use it. When they’re in trouble, they always pull out the racist word. And they are in very big trouble, I have to tell you.

And for the most part we haven’t even started spending our money yet. And we have raised a lot of money. And I’m putting in my money. And I put in a hell of a lot of money. In fact, if things don’t work out, even though a lot of people are saying this was one of the great political phenomenas they’ve ever seen. They’ve never seen — they call it a phenomena. I will tell you. If it doesn’t work out, it will be a tremendous waste of time, energy and money. And she’s angry for even suggesting it. But we’re going to — hey look, Nov. 8 you go and vote. We’re winning. I’ll tell you what. If you vote, we’re winning. There’s no way they can beat us. There’s no way she can beat us because her people have no enthusiasm, whatsoever. They’re not going to turn out. They don’t have the enthusiasm. Who could possibly have enthusiasm? What are you getting?

You turn out, we’re winning big league. And I think — and they’re all saying the Trump people are going to turn out. We have a movement like they have never, ever seen in this country. And they say in terms of enthusiasm they have never had polling higher. So I think, I have very little doubt, turnout we’re going to have a tremendous Nov. 8. Probably we’ll say Nov. 8 plus the next four years and then four years after that, OK?

But the racist word, it’s the oldest play in the Democratic playbook, and Americans have had enough of it, OK. We get it. We get it.

I’ll tell you what, I just — I told you I just left Little Haiti. The love is unbelievable. It’s unbelievable. There’s no racist. There’s no nothing. It’s love. They want solutions. They want better lives, not more petty attacks from failed and totally discredited politicians like crooked Hillary Clinton. They want their immigration laws enforced and their border secured.

[U.S.A. chant]

Let’s win on Nov. 8, OK? That’ll be —

They’re patriotic Americans of all backgrounds who want their jobs and their families protected. They want protection. People who warn about radical Islamic terrorism are not Islamophobes. Everyone’s an Islamophobe. You mention something you’re an Islamophobe. You know they come up with words. Hey, I went to Ivy League school. I did very well — great. They have so many new words. Islamophobe.

We have a president — and frankly Hillary — who don’t use the words radical Islamic terrorism. And if you don’t know what you’re fighting, you’re not going to fight it very well. And we’ve proven that. We have decent American citizens who want to uphold our tolerant values and keep our country safe. We want to keep our country safe. People who support the police, who want crime reduced and ended, and who are not prejudiced. They’re concerned and loving citizens whose hearts break every time an innocent child is killed, violently, on the streets, which is happening all over our country.

Yet while Hillary Clinton lives behind gates and walls and guards, and raises millions from hedge funds — you know look what she’s doing with these hedge funds, raising millions and millions. I know so many of these people. Give me a break. The hedge fund and the Wall Street donors she slanders and smears with her statements last week. Working people who just want a fraction of the security enjoyed by our politicians and certainly enjoyed by her.

Now you know she’s very much against the Second Amendment. She wants to destroy your Second Amendment. Guns, guns, guns, right. I think what we should do is she goes around with armed bodyguards like you have never seen before. I think that her bodyguards should drop all weapons. They should disarm, right? Right? I think they should disarm immediately. What do you think? Yes? Yeah.

Take their guns away. She doesn’t want guns. Take their — let’s see what happens to her. Take their guns away. OK? It’d be very dangerous. Her comments displayed the same sense of arrogance and entitlement that led her to violate federal law as secretary of State, hide and delete her e-mails, destroy her iPhones — with a hammer! With a hammer! Thirteen of them. Put classified information in the reach of our enemies, lie to Congress, and sell government favors and access through her foundation. It’s the same attitude of arrogance and entitlement that explains why she has never taken accountability for the disaster she created in Libya, Syria, Iraq, Iran and all over the world. Everything she touched, it just didn’t work out. Certainly it didn’t work out for our country.

It’s the same reason why she won’t take responsibility for her central role in unleashing ISIS all over the world. Her policies have created disaster overseas and poverty at home. We see it. Look, we see it. I drove here. We see it. We see it. I’m running to reverse these failures. And they are incredible failures. And create a new American future. And that future begins with prosperity at home. My economic agenda can be summed up in three words. And you’re going to like these three words. Jobs, jobs, jobs.

One of my highest priorities is to bring jobs into our inner cities. African-American communities have suffered horribly as a result of failed Democratic leadership. Democrats have run these inner cities for a half a century, for 60 years, 75 years, even in some cases 100 years straight. Unabated. Unbroken. Over 100 years. They control the mayor’s offices, the school boards, the city councils and the seats in Congress. And all they have delivered is more poverty, more crime and more failing schools.

Sixty-five percent of African-American children under the age of six now live in poverty. More than 3,000 people have been shot in the city of Chicago this year. This year. Think of it, since Jan. 1. Fifty-eight percent of African-American youth are not working. Can’t get a job. These are the results of the policies embraced by Hillary Clinton. And everyone knows that if she’s elected the inner cities will get nothing but more pain and suffering and crime and heartache.

[U.S.A. chant]

Amazing people. Amazing country. We have an amazing country. And honestly you see the crime statistics. You’re African-American. You have the inner city problems that have been going on for ever. Forever. You have problems like nobody has. And you look at crime. You look at schools. You look at no jobs. Look at the worst education. Look how dangerous. You can’t walk down the street. You get shot or your child gets shot. And I’ve been saying it, and I’ll say it openly — and some people like it and some people don’t like it, and I don’t really care. What do you have to lose? I will fix it. I’m going to fix it. We’re going to fix our inner cities. We’re going to make them safe. We’re going to bring jobs back. So to the African-American people within the community, what do you have to lose? It can’t get — honestly, it can’t get — that’s so nice, thank you. It can’t get any worse. It can’t get any worse. It can’t get any worse. Thank you. So nice. Thank you. Thank you very much. It can’t get any worse, the crime, the jobs. No jobs. No education. Worst education. More unsafe — you go to Afghanistan, right. We hear Afghanistan. I mean we have cities that are far more dangerous than Afghanistan. Inner cities. African-American people within that community and outside of that community are going to be voting for Donald Trump in record numbers. You watch. We’re going to fix it.

Hillary Clinton has been in Washington for 30 years. Her disastrous record speaks for itself. And I have to tell you. When she ran for the United States Senate in New York, we have upstate New York which is a total disaster, economic disaster. She said she’s going to bring back jobs, jobs, jobs. She — anyway, she gets elected. We lost our jobs. It got worse. She didn’t do anything. She didn’t do anything. She went home. She went to sleep, OK. She didn’t do anything. She didn’t do anything. It got worse. Far worse now, it’s a total catastrophe. Just remember that.

When she tells you about jobs, when she tells you she’s going to fix trade deals, she wouldn’t know where to begin. She wouldn’t know where to begin. And besides that, to do that kind of thing, to negotiate great trade deals, to re-enhance our — I mean look. Our military is so depleted. We have the greatest people on earth. They’re using equipment that’s old. They’re flying planes that are old. You see what’s happening. It’s a depleted military. We have to have a strong military. We have to take care of our vets. We have to take care of our vets.

But to do these things you need a lot of energy. And she does not have the energy. And in my opinion she is totally unfit to be the president of the United States. The only people that she will deliver for, frankly, are her donors and her special interests. I’m going to deliver for you, believe me. The American people. We’re going to deliver. You’re gonna be happy. And those inner cities are going to see progress like they have probably, not probably. Like they have never seen. You watch. Like they have never seen. Thank you.

If we lower our taxes and we’re getting a massive tax reduction — and by the way, Hillary Clinton is raising your taxes substantially.

If we remove destructive regulations, unleash the vast treasure of American energy. We have so much energy. It’s being destroyed, our economic worth. And negotiate trade deals that put America first. Then there is no limit to the number of jobs we can create and the amount of prosperity we can unleash. There is no limit. Pay off our debt. Pay down our debt. Reduce taxes. Get rid of regulations. My first day in office I’m going to order a review of every single regulation issued over the last 10 years.

All needless, job-killing regulations will be immediately canceled. Millions of new jobs will come pouring in. And we’re going to lift the restrictions on American energy — which means at least another half a million jobs each year. They are being destroyed. And we’re unable to compete with other nations. Very simple. And that’s just the beginning. Also on my first day I’m going to ask Congress to send me a bill to immediately repeal and replace disastrous Obamacare. It has turned out to be a disaster.

This alone will instantly save another two million jobs. And if you look at your premiums, it’s through the roof. And by the way, on Nov. 1, just before the election on Nov. 8, new numbers are coming out which will show 40, 50, 60 percent increases. They want to delay it until after the election because it’s election — it’s a disaster. It’s a disaster. And your deductibles are so high that unless you lead a really long, slow, vicious death, you’re never going to be able to use it, OK. Do you see the deductibles? You’re never going to be able to use it.

I’m also going to completely reform our trade deals. We’re going to renegotiate NAFTA. Probably the worst trade deal ever agreed to, signed in the history of the world, not in the United States. It’s destroyed our manufacturing in our country. It’s destroyed. And by the way, guess who signed it? Bill Clinton. You look at all of the places, Florida included. But you look at upstate New York, you look at Ohio, you look at Pennsylvania. You look at all of these different places have been destroyed. Absolutely destroyed.

You look at New England. Look what happened to New England. They’ve been destroyed by companies moving out, going into Mexico, firing everybody. Unemployment through the roof. We’re going to stand up to China, and keep America out of the Trans-Pacific Partnership — another catastrophe. TPP will be almost as bad as NAFTA. Nothing can be as bad as NAFTA. Trans-Pacific Partnership will be almost as bad as NAFTA. It’ll take your jobs, Ohio. Remember, it’s going to take your jobs, Ohio. I tell you that. Michigan. So many places.

TPP is a disaster. We don’t need another massive multinational deal, by the way, that nobody on our side even reads, that ties us up and binds us down and doesn’t even discuss monetary manipulation and devaluation, which is how China and all these countries are beating us so badly. Not even discussed. And they had provisions in the agreement, and they would take it out because certain politicians didn’t want to have them in there. I wonder why.

Another major reform is going to be school choice. And we’re going to terminate Common Core. And we’re bringing our education local. I’ve outlined a plan to provide every disadvantaged child in America the freedom to choose the private, public, magnet or religious school of his or her choice. This will help lift millions of poor African-American and Hispanic children out of poverty, something we are going to do. Since President Obama came into office another two million Hispanic Americans have fallen into poverty. It’s catastrophic. And it’s totally unacceptable. To the Hispanic community I say we are going to protect your jobs. We’re going to build up your schools. And we’re going to deliver safety and opportunity for your children. You have no safety. You have little opportunity.

This week I also rolled out a plan to help our mothers and our families get affordable quality child care for their children. Child care. Ivanka Trump, very much for child care. She’s been talking about that to me for two years, long before I even decided to go through this journey. And it’s not easy, I want to tell you. We speak in rooms like this. This is about 100 degrees right now. That’s considered a cool auditorium. And the reason is we have such big crowds like this one. Look at that. Every single corner. Unbelievable. These rooms weren’t designed for this many people. And it is hot in these rooms. And we stand up here and we talk. And we do two or three and sometimes we’ll be hitting four a day.

Do you think Hillary Clinton can get through one? You ever see her 18-minute speech? Bomb. Bomb. Bomb. See ya. See ya, I’m going home.

No. We’re doing it the right way. And frankly, when they spend hundreds of millions of dollars on advertising I don’t have to because I do it the old fashioned way. I come into your neighborhood, right. It’s a lot cheaper. It’s a lot harder work, but it’s a lot cheaper. Very true. Very, very true. On policy after policy we’re going to provide opportunity, prosperity and security for all Americans. We’re also going to stand with the Cuban people in their fight against Communist oppression.

No, we’re on the right side. Great people. They’re great people. The president’s one-sided deal for Cuba and with Cuba benefits only the Castro regime. People are very unhappy about it.

You know what’s interesting? When he landed the plane recently in China, right, they refused to give him a stairway out of Air Force One. Now that is a first in the history of Air Force One. So he used basically the mechanics’ stairs. That’s the stairs they drop down to get the mechanics up to fix the light bulb, right. When he landed the plane in Saudi Arabia, which we protect. Without us they wouldn’t be there for two months. He landed in Saudi Arabia. He wasn’t greeted by the top officials. Now what would I have done in those two cases? Bomb. Take me back to Washington, Jim. Let’s go. Right. Let’s go. Let’s go, Jim. Get going. Close those doors. We’re going home.

Now with Cuba, with Cuba we land in Cuba and there’s no Castro to greet him. The big leaders weren’t there to greet him. And I have a lot of Cuban friends. But you would have all done the same thing again. Jim, let’s close those doors. We’re going home. Right? Right? Let’s go, captain. We’re going home. We’re going into Washington. Maybe we’ll head into Miami actually. That’s not a bad idea. Terrible. That’s three. Three. Saudi Arabia, Cuba, China. Air Force One has never been treated so badly in its long and incredible history.

Air Force One used to land and people would respect the people inside. And they’d come out and there’d be all sorts of hoopla. Not anymore. It’s unbelievable. And these are countries that have benefited by us greatly. So we have to make great deals before we do anything with Cuba or anybody else, right. We’re going to make great deals. You’ll be happy. You’re going to be happy, I tell you.

How many people are from Cuba here? Come here. Tell me. Cuban. Cuban. Good. Do you agree with me? Do you agree? We’ll do it. But we’ll do it with great deals. And we’ll do it with democracy. And we’ll do it the way we have to do it. OK? We’ll do it the right way.

Where is Ms. Delgado? Does everybody know? What a great — where is she? She is so amazing. A.J. Where is A.J. Wow, she’s so — she’s become a tremendous star. Tell you one thing, when she’s representing me I wouldn’t do it anyway, but I can. Turn off the television. I’m well protected. Thank you. Great job. Thank you very much. Thank you, A.J.

But all of the concessions that Barack Obama has granted the Castro regime were done through executive order, which means the next president can reverse them. And that I will do unless the Castro regime meets our demands. Not my demands, our demands. You know what the demands are.

Those demands will include religious and political freedom for the Cuban people. And the freeing of political prisoners. The freeing of political prisoners. Right? Am I — is that right? Oh boy. Oh boy. What energy in this room. What energy. A lot of energy.

You’ll be very happy, my Cuban friends. I have so many friends from Cuba. Incredible people. So let’s also talk about a place called Venezuela. They — now who’s here from Venezuela? Or related in some — not too many. Whoa. Whoa. What’s going on? Not too many? Friend or foe? I think he’s friend. I think he’s friend. No, he’s OK. He’s OK.

By the way, is there any place more fun to be than a Trump rally? You tell me. Right?

Tell you. We have a lot of Venezuelans around Doral, the Doral section, right. And it’s a beautiful, vibrant — this is an amazing place. But they are really having trouble over in Venezuela. But Miami is filled with hardworking, incredible Venezuelan people. But it’s been hurt very badly by Socialist Venezuela. And the next president of the United States must stand in solidarity with all people oppressed in our atmosphere. And we will stand with oppressed people. And there are many.

The oppressed people of Venezuela, they are yearning to be free. They are yearning for help. The system is bad. But the people are great. Great. They are great people. Here in America I’ll push to expand freedom for all of our citizens. I’m going to lower your taxes so substantially. We’re getting rid of all of those regulations on business. So many small business owners here, I know five of them. One of them was small business now he’s big business. I’m proud of him. He’s right here. But we’re going to get rid of those terrible, terrible regulations.

He just said to me, and the thing that surprised me most, we’re bringing business tax rates down from 35 percent to 15 percent. And yet — it’ll be the greatest cut, I believe, in the history of our country. But I will tell you what surprises me tremendously is that the people that have these cuts, they’re more concerned with regulation than even a big tax decrease because regulations are choking and killing our businesses and stopping our businesses from hiring people, jobs. So I’m going to appoint justices of the Supreme Court who will follow the Constitution.

I’m going to rebuild our depleted — we’re going to take care of our, the vets. Who’s a vet? Who’s a vet? Where are my vets? Where are they? There they — OK. Now they’re standing up. Now they — I know we had a lot of vets here. Thank you, fellas. Thank you very much. We’re going to take care of our vets. We’re going to save your Second Amendment. Do you know if you look at some of the things, the catastrophes — you look at Orlando. You look at San Bernardino. You look at so many different — you look at Paris. The toughest gun laws in the world, they have it in Paris.

These thugs, these animals walked in and they just go bomb, bomb, bomb. Nobody had guns on the other side. If there were guns on the other side, just a few of them, number one, probably if they knew, they wouldn’t have attacked.

And number two, even if they did attack, it would’ve been a whole different story. One hundred thirty people killed. People massively injured, still in the hospital. Their lives are just destroyed. And if they had protection, if they had guns on the other side, with the bullets flying the other direction, it would’ve been a whole different story. So we’re going to protect your Second Amendment. And I’m going to stop illegal immigration and drugs from coming into our country. And yes, we will build a wall. We’ll build a wall. We will build a wall.

[Build that wall chant]

Who’s going to pay for the wall? One hundred percent. One hundred percent. And we’re going to be renegotiating NAFTA and our terrible trade deals. We’re going to make great deals out of horrible deals. And if we can’t renegotiate the deal because the other side is so, so happy with it, we’re going to terminate the deal and we’ll start all over again, folks.

We’ll have new deals. And they’ll be much better deals. And they’ll be two-way streets. The traffic, it’ll be coming our way. It’s a one-way street out of the United States for our jobs and our money. You know I always say we get the drugs, they get the cash. That’s the deal, folks. No good. They’re building in Mexico right now, and Mexico’s just one example, some of the greatest plants. A friend of mine builds plants. And he tells me all the time — I called him up the other day. I called him up six months ago, told me the same thing. Nothing changes. Ford. They just announced yesterday they’re moving their small car division, the whole thing, into Mexico. That’s on top of spending billions and billions of dollars. And then you wonder why I’m winning in Michigan. Because I’ve been telling the people in Michigan. I’ve been telling the people in Ohio for five years that this is happening. And our politicians don’t do anything about it. And Hillary Clinton will never do anything about it. She doesn’t have the capability to do it.

We will rebuild our roads and bridges, tunnels, highways, airports, schools and hospitals. American cars will travel the roads. American planes will soar in the sky. They’ll soar. And American ships will patrol the seas. American steel will send new skyscrapers right here in Miami into the clouds. But it’ll be American steel. American hands will rebuild this nation. And American energy mined from American sources will power our energy. And we’ll take care of our steel workers. And we’ll take care of our miners who have been destroyed by this administration, destroyed.

And Hillary Clinton has already said she’s going to put the miners out of business. We’re going to take care of our miners. They’re amazing people. American workers will be hired to do the job. We will put new American steel into the spine of our country. I will fight for every neglected part of this nation. And I will fight to bring us all together as one people. Imagine what our country could accomplish if we started working together as one people under one God, saluting one flag.

[U.S.A. chant]

It’s time to break with the bitter failures of the past and to embrace a new, inclusive and prosperous American future. We’re not prosperous anymore. We owe $20 trillion. We have a president who in seven-and-a-half years has doubled the debt. Our country’s in trouble. A lot of people don’t know it, but our country’s in trouble. And we’re going to make sure that trouble never comes. Let me tell you. Jobs will return. Incomes will rise. And new factories will come rushing back to our shores. Once more we will have a government of, by and for the people.

We will make America wealthy again. We will make America safe again. We will make America strong again. And we will make America great again.

Thank you, everybody. Thank you. Thank you, Miami.
ESIDENT:  Thank you very much, everybody.  Thank you.  (Applause.)  So we’re just going to let the other folks come in, fill it up.  This is some crowd.  You have to see what’s outside, you wouldn’t even believe it.  (Applause.)  Unbelievable.

So I’m thrilled to be here in Nashville, Tennessee, the home — (applause) — of country music, Southern hospitality, and the great President Andrew Jackson.  (Applause.)  I just came from a tour of Andrew Jackson’s home to mark the 250th anniversary of his birth.  Jackson’s life was devoted to one very crucial principle — he understood that real leadership means putting America first.  (Applause.)

Before becoming President, Andrew Jackson served your state from the House of Representatives and in the United States Senate, and he also served as commander of the Tennessee militia.  Tough cookie.  Tough cookie.  (Applause.)

So let’s begin tonight by thanking all of the incredible men and women of the United States military and all of our wonderful veterans.  The veterans.  (Applause.)

AUDIENCE:  USA!  USA!  USA!

THE PRESIDENT:  Amazing.  There’s no place I’d rather be than with all of you here tonight, with the wonderful, hardworking citizens of our country.  (Applause.)  I would much rather spend time with you than any of the pundits, consultants, or special interests, certainly — or reporters from Washington, D.C.  (Applause.)

It’s patriotic Americans like you who make this country run, and run well.  You pay your taxes, follow our laws, support your communities, raise your children, love your country, and send your bravest to fight in our wars.  (Applause.)  All you want is a government that shows you the same loyalty in return.  It’s time that Washington heard your voice — and believe me, on November 8th, they heard your voice.  (Applause.)  The forgotten men and women of our country will never be forgotten again, believe me.  (Applause.)

I want to thank so many of your state leaders — State Party Chairman Scott Golden; Congressman Scott DesJarlais; Congresswoman Marsha Blackburn; Congresswoman Diane Black; Congressman Jimmy Duncan — right from the beginning.  (Applause.)  Governor Bill Haslam.  (Applause.)  A great friend of mine, Senator Bob Corker.  (Applause.)  An incredible guy, respected by all — Senator Lamar Alexander.  (Applause.)  And so many more.  Thank you all for being here.

We’re going to be working closely together to deliver for you, the citizens of Tennessee, like you’ve never been delivered for before.  Thank you.  Thank you.  (Applause.)  Thank you.  We’re going to reduce your taxes — big league.  Big.  (Applause.)  Big.  I want to start that process so quickly.  Got to get the healthcare done.  We got to start the tax reductions.  (Applause.)

We are going to enforce our trade rules and bring back our jobs, which are scattered all over the world.  They’re coming back to our country.  (Applause.)  We’re going to support the amazing — absolutely amazing men and women of law enforcement.  (Applause.)  Protect your freedoms, and defend the Second Amendment.  (Applause.)  And we are going to restore respect for our country and for its great and very beautiful flag.  (Applause.)

It’s been a little over 50 days since my inauguration, and we’ve been putting our America First agenda very much into action.  You see what’s happening.  We’re keeping our promises.  In fact, they have signs — “He’s Kept His Promise.”  They’re all over the place.  I have.  (Applause.)  We have done far more — I think maybe more than anybody’s done in this office in 50 days, that I could tell you.  (Applause.)

And we have just gotten started.  Wait until you see what’s coming, folks.  We’ve appointed a Supreme Court justice to replace the late, great Antonin Scalia.  His name is Judge Neil Gorsuch.  (Applause.)  He will uphold and defend the Constitution of the United States.  We are proposing a budget that will shrink the bloated federal bureaucracy — and I mean bloated — while protecting our national security.  You see what we’re doing with our military — bigger, better, stronger than ever before.  You see what’s happening.  (Applause.)  And you’re already seeing the results.  Our budget calls for one of the single largest increases in defense spending history in this country.  (Applause.)

We believe — especially the people in Tennessee, I know you people so well — (applause) — in peace through strength.  That’s what we’re going to have.  And we are taking steps to make sure that our allies pay their fair share.  They have to pay.  (Applause.)  We’ve begun a dramatic effort to eliminate job-killing federal regulations like nobody has ever seen before — slash, slash.  We’re going to protect the environment, we’re going to protect people’s safeties, but, let me tell you, the regulation business has become a terrible business, and we’re going to bring it down to where it should be.  (Applause.)

AUDIENCE:  USA! USA! USA!

THE PRESIDENT:  Okay, let’s go.  One person — and they’ll be the story tomorrow — did you hear there was a protestor?  (Applause.)

We’re going to put our miners back to work.  We’re going to put our auto industry back to work.  Already because of this new business climate, we are creating jobs that are starting to pour back into our country like we haven’t seen in many, many decades.  (Applause.)

In the first two job reports since I took the oath of office, we’ve already added nearly half a million new jobs, and believe me, it’s just beginning.  (Applause.)  I’ve already authorized the construction of the long-stalled and delayed Keystone and Dakota Access pipelines.  (Applause.)  A lot of jobs.

I’ve also directed that new pipelines must be constructed with American steel.  (Applause.)  They want to build them here, they use our steel.  We believe in two simple rules:  Buy American and Hire American.  (Applause.)

On trade, I’ve kept my promise to the American people, and withdrawn from the Trans-Pacific Partnership disaster. (Applause.)  Tennessee has lost one third of its manufacturing jobs since the institution of NAFTA, one of the worst trade deals ever in history.  Our nation has lost over 60,000 factories since China joined the World Trade Organization — 60,000.  Think of that.  More than that.

We’re not going to let it happen anymore.  From now on, we are going to defend the American worker and our great American companies.  (Applause.)  And if America does what it says, and if your President does what I’ve been telling you, there is nobody anywhere in the world that can even come close to us, folks.  Not even close.  (Applause.)

If a company wants to leave America, fire their workers, and then ship their new products back into our country, there will be consequences.  (Applause.)  That’s what we have borders for.  And by the way, aren’t our borders getting extremely strong?  (Applause.)  Very strong.

AUDIENCE:  USA! USA! USA!

THE PRESIDENT:  Don’t even think about it.  We will build the wall.  Don’t even think about it.  (Applause.)  In fact, as you probably read, we went out to bid.  We had hundreds of bidders.  Everybody wants to build our wall.  (Applause.)  Usually, that means we’re going to get a good price.  We’re going to get a good price, believe me.  (Applause.)  We’re going to build the wall.

Some of the fake news said, I don’t think Donald Trump wants to build the wall.  Can you imagine if I said we’re not going to build a wall?  Fake news.  Fake, fake news.  Fake news, folks.  A lot of fake.

No, the wall is way ahead of schedule in terms of where we are.  It’s under design, and you’re going to see some very good things happening.  But the border by itself right now is doing very well.  It’s becoming very strong.  General Kelly has done a great job — General Kelly.

My administration is also following through on our promise to secure, protect, and defend that border within our United States.  Our southern border will be protected always.  It will have the wall.  Drugs will stop pouring in and poisoning our youth, and that will happen very, very soon.  You’re already seeing what’s going on.  The drugs are pouring into our country, folks.  They are poisoning our youth and plenty of others, and we’re going to stop it.  We’re not going to playing games.  Not going to be playing games.  (Applause.)  Following my executive action — and don’t forget, we’ve only been here for like — what? — 50 days — we’ve already experienced an unprecedented 40-percent reduction in illegal immigration on our Southern border; 61 percent since Inauguration Day — 61 percent.  Think about it.

And now people are saying, we’re not going to go there anymore because we can’t get in.  So it’s going to get better and better.  We got to stop those drugs, though.  We got to stop those drugs.

During the campaign, as I traveled all across this country, I met with many American families whose loved ones were viciously and violently killed by illegal immigrants because our government refused to enforce our already existing laws.  These American victims were ignored by the media.  They were ignored by Washington.  But they were not ignored by me, and they’re not ignored by you, and they never will be ignored certainly any longer.  Not going to happen.  (Applause.)

As we speak, we are finding the drug dealers, the robbers, thieves, gang members, killers and criminals preying on our citizens.  One by one — you’re reading about it, right?  They’re being thrown out of our country.  They’re being thrown into prisons.  And we will not let them back in.  (Applause.)

We’re also working, night and day, to keep our nation safe from terrorism.  (Applause.)  We have seen the devastation from 9/11 to Boston to San Bernardino — hundreds upon hundreds of people from outside our country have been convicted of terrorism-related offenses in the United States courts.  Right now we have investigations going on all over — hundreds of refugees are under federal investigation for terrorism and related reasons.  We have entire regions of the world destabilized by terrorism and ISIS.  For this reason, I issued an executive order to temporarily suspend immigration from places where it cannot safely occur.  (Applause.)

But let me give you the bad news.  We don’t like bad news, right?  I don’t want to hear — and I’ll turn it into good.  But let me give you the bad, the sad news.  Moments ago, I learned that a district judge in Hawaii — part of the much overturned 9th Circuit Court — and I have to be nice; otherwise I’ll get criticized for speaking poorly about our courts.  I’ll be criticized by these people, among the most dishonest people in the world — I will be criticized — I’ll be criticized by them for speaking harshly about our courts.  I would never want to do that.  A judge has just blocked our executive order on travel and refugees coming into our country from certain countries.

AUDIENCE:  Booo —

THE PRESIDENT:  The order he blocked was a watered-version of the first order that was also blocked by another judge and should have never been blocked to start with.  This new order was tailored to the dictates of the 9th Circuit’s — in my opinion — flawed ruling.  This is, the opinion of many, an unprecedented judicial overreach.  The law and the Constitution give the President the power to suspend immigration when he deems — or she — or she.  Fortunately, it will not be Hillary she.  (Applause.)  When he or she deems it to be in the national interest of our country.

So we have a lot of lawyers here.  We also have a lot of smart people here.  Let me read to you directly from the federal statute, 212F, of the immigration — and you know what I’m talking about, right?  Can I read this to you?  Listen to this.  Now, we’re all smart people.  We’re all good students — some are bad students, but even if you’re a bad student this is a real easy one, let me tell you.  Ready?

So here’s the statute — which they don’t even want to quote when they overrule it.  And it was put here for the security of our country.  And this goes beyond me, because there will be other Presidents, and we need this.  And sometimes we need it very badly for security — security of our country.

It says — now, listen how easy this is.  “Whenever the President finds that the entry of any aliens or any class of aliens would be detrimental to the interests of the United States, he may, by proclamation, and for such period as he — see, it wasn’t politically correct, because it should say he or she.  You know, today they’d say that.  Actually, that’s the only mistake they made.  “as he shall deem necessary, suspending entry of all aliens, or any class of aliens, as immigrants or nonimmigrants, or pose on the entry of aliens any restrictions he may deems to be appropriate.”  In other words, if he thinks there’s danger out there, he or she — whoever is President — can say, I’m sorry, folks, not now, please.  We’ve got enough problems.  (Applause.)

We’re talking about the safety of our nation, the safety and security of our people.  (Applause.)  Now, I know you people aren’t skeptical people because nobody would be that way in Tennessee.  Right?  Nobody — not Tennessee.  You don’t think this was done by a judge for political reasons, do you?  No.

AUDIENCE:  Booo —

THE PRESIDENT:  This ruling makes us look weak — which, by the way, we no longer are, believe me.  (Applause.)  Just look at our borders.  We’re going to fight this terrible ruling.  We’re going to take our case as far as it needs to go, including all the way up to the Supreme Court.  (Applause.)  We’re going to win.  We’re going to keep our citizens safe.  And regardless, we’re going to keep our citizens safe, believe me.  (Applause.)  Even liberal Democratic lawyer, Alan Dershowitz —- good lawyer — just said that we would win this case before the Supreme Court of the United States.  (Applause.)

Remember this, I wasn’t thrilled, but the lawyers all said, let’s tailor it.  This is a watered–down version of the first one.  This is a watered–down version.  And let me tell you something, I think we ought to go back to the first one and go all the way, which is what I wanted to do in the first one.  (Applause.)

The danger is clear, the law is clear, the need for my executive order is clear.  I was elected to change our broken and dangerous system and thinking in government that has weakened and endangered our country and left our people defenseless.  (Applause.)  And I will not stop fighting for the safety of you and your families, believe me.  Not today, not ever.  We’re going to win it.  We’re going to win it.  (Applause.)

We’re going to apply common sense.  We’re going to apply intelligence.  And we’re never quitting, and we’re never going away, and we’re never, ever giving up.  The best way to keep foreign terrorists — or, as some people would say in certain instances, radical Islamic terrorists — from attacking our country is to stop them from entering our country in the first place.  (Applause.)

We’ll take it, but these are the problems we have.  People are screaming, break up the 9th Circuit.  And I’ll tell you what, that 9th Circuit — you have to see.  Take a look at how many times they have been overturned with their terrible decisions.  Take a look.  And this is what we have to live with.

Finally, I want to get to taxes.  I want to cut the hell out of taxes, but — (applause) — but before I can do that — I would have loved to have put it first, I’ll be honest — there is one more very important thing that we have to do, and we are going to repeal and replace horrible, disastrous Obamacare.  (Applause.)

If we leave Obamacare in place, millions and millions of people will be forced off their plans, and your senators just told me that in your state you’re down to practically no insurers.  You’re going to have nobody.  You’re going to have nobody.  And this is true all over.  The insurers are fleeing.  The insurers are fleeing.  It’s a catastrophic situation, and there’s nothing to compare anything to because Obamacare won’t be around for a year or two.  It’s gone.  So it’s not like, oh, gee, they have this.  Obamacare is gone.

Premiums will continue to soar double digits and even triple digits in many cases.  It will drain our budget and destroy our jobs.  Remember all of the broken promises?  You can keep your doctor, you can keep your plan.  Remember the wise guy — remember the wise guy that essentially said the American people — the so–called architect — the American people are stupid because they approved it?  We’re going to show them.

Those in Congress who made these promises have no credibility whatsoever on healthcare.   (Applause.)  And remember this — remember this:  If we took, because there’s such divisiveness — and I’m not just talking now, with me.  There was with Obama.  There was with Bush.  The level of hatred and divisiveness with the politicians.  I remember years ago, I’d go to Washington — I* was always very politically active — and Republicans and Democrats, they’d fight during the day and they go to dinner at night.  Today, there’s a level that nobody has seen before.

Just remember this:  If we submitted the Democrats’ plan, drawn everything perfect for the Democrats, we wouldn’t get one vote from the Democrats.  That’s the way it is.  That’s how much divisiveness and other things there are.  So it’s a problem.  But we’re going to get it by.

So, I’ve met with so many victims of Obamacare —- the people who have been so horribly hurt by this horrible legislation.  At the very core of Obamacare was a fatal flaw — the government forcing people to buy a government–approved product.  There are very few people — very few people.

AUDIENCE MEMBER:  Booo —

THE PRESIDENT:  By the way — watch what happens.  Now you just booed Obamacare.  They will say, Trump got booed when he mentioned — they’re bad people, folks.  They’re bad people.

AUDIENCE:  Booo —

THE PRESIDENT:  Tonight, I’ll go home, I’ll turn on, I’ll say — listen, I’ll turn on that television.  My wife will say, darling, it’s too bad you got booed.  I said, I didn’t get booed.  This was a — I said, no, no, they were booing Obamacare.  Watch, a couple of them will actually do it, almost guaranteed.  But when we call them out, it makes it harder for them to do it.  So we’ll see.  It’s the fake, fake media.  We want Americans to be able to purchase the health insurance plans they want, not the plans forced on them by our government.  (Applause.)

The House has put forward a plan to repeal and replace Obamacare based on the principles I outlined in my joint address, but let me tell you, we’re going to arbitrate, we’re going to all get together and we’re going to get something done.  Remember this — if we didn’t do it the way we’re doing it, we need 60 votes so we have to get the Democrats involved.  They won’t vote, no matter what we do, they’re not going to vote.  So we’re doing it a different way, a complex way.  It’s fine.  The end result is when you have phase one, phase two, phase three — it’s going to be great.  It’s going to be great.

And then, we get on to tax reductions, which I like.  (Applause.)  The House legislation does so much for you.  It gives the states Medicaid flexibility.  And some of the states will take over their healthcare.  Governor Rick Scott in Florida said, just send me the money — they run a great plan.  We have states that are doing great.  It gives great flexibility.

Thank you, folks.  Thank you.  (Applause.)  It repeals hundreds of billions of dollars in Obamacare taxes.  It provides tax credits to purchase the care that is rightfully theirs.  The bill that I will ultimately sign — and that will be a bill where everybody is going to get into the room and we’re going to get it done — we’ll get rid of Obamacare and make healthcare better for you and for your family.  (Applause.)

And once this is done, and a step further, we are going to try and put it in phase three — I’m going to work on bringing down the cost of medicine by having a fair and competitive bidding process.  (Applause.)

We welcome this healthcare debate and its negotiation, and we’re going to carry it out, and have been carrying it out, in the full light of day — unlike the way Obamacare was passed.  Remember, folks, if we don’t do anything, Obamacare is gone.  It’s not like, oh, gee, it’s going to be wonderful in three years.  It’s gone.  It’s gone.  It’s gone.  Not working.  It’s gone.  What we cannot do is to be intimidated by the dishonest attacks from Democratic leaders in Congress who broke the system in the first place and who don’t believe you should be able to make your own healthcare decisions.  (Applause.)

I am very confident that if we empower the American people we will accomplish incredible things for our country — not just on healthcare, but all across our government.  We will unlock new frontiers in science and in medicine.  We will give our children the right to attend the school of their choice, one where they will be taught to love this country and its values.  (Applause.)  We will create millions and millions of new jobs by lowering taxes on our businesses, and very importantly for our workers, we’re going to lower taxes.  (Applause.)

And we will fight for the right of every American child to grow up in a safe neighborhood, attend a great school, and to graduate with access to a high-paying job that they love doing.  (Applause.)

No matter our background, no matter our income, no matter our geography, we all share the same home.  We all salute the same flag.  And we all are made by the same God.  (Applause.)

AUDIENCE:  USA!  USA!  USA!

THE PRESIDENT:  It’s time to embrace our glorious American destiny.  Anything we can dream for our country we can achieve for our country.  All we have to do is tap into that American pride that is swelling our hearts and stirring our souls.  And we found that out very recently in our last election — a lot of pride.  (Applause.)  We are all Americans, and the future truly belongs to us.  The future belongs to all of you.  This is your moment.  This is your time.  This is the hour when history is made.  All we have to do is put our own citizens first, and together we will make America strong again.  (Applause.)  We will make America wealthy again.  We will make America proud again.  We will make America safe again.  And we will make America great again.  (Applause.)

Thank you.  God bless you.  Thank you.  (Applause.)  God bless you, everybody.  (Applause.)
